This video is sponsored by War Thunder.
For centuries, warships were towering
wooden vessels lined with broadside
cannons. But they lacked armor, could
only fire within a narrow arc, and
depended entirely on the wind. Then in
1862, everything changed when the USS
Monitor arrived. Low to the water,
forged in iron, steam driven, and
crowned with a rotating turret that
could fire in nearly any direction,
revolutionizing naval warfare. In this
video, we've modeled the entire USS
Monitor inside and out to see how this
radical [music] vessel worked and why it
became the blueprint for the modern
Navy. But before we get [music] into it,
this is Deconstructed. We break down the
engineering behind history's most
fascinating machines, vehicles, and
structures. So, let's see how it all
works. During the American Civil War,
the Union and Confederacy found
themselves in a rapidly escalating
technological arms race. Each side was
searching for an edge. A single
innovation that could tip the balance.
The turning point came when the steam
frigate USS Marramac, which had been
scuttled by the Union, was raised
[music] by Confederate forces. They
rebuilt and converted her into an
ironclad, an armored steamowered
warship, renaming her CSS Virginia.
[music] As the Virginia was being built,
Union forces rushed to combat this
threat by building an ironclad of its
own, the USS Monitor. They selected the
design of naval engineer John Ericson,
whose proposal was unlike anything the
Navy had ever seen. A lowprofile hole
with a rotating [music] gun turret
mounted on top. The USS Monitor would
become the first US Navy [music] vessel
to feature a revolving gun turret. A
breakthrough that would go on to
revolutionize naval warfare and warship
design entirely. Construction moved at
breakneck speed. Built in just roughly
100 days, Monitor was launched days
prior to the Virginia from the Brooklyn
Navyyard in January 1862, making her the
first ironclad commissioned by the US
Navy. A few weeks later, the two
ironclads met in battle. The Battle of
Hampton Roads was part of the
Confederate effort to break the Union
blockade, which had cut off Virginia's
largest cities from international trade.
What followed became one of the most
iconic naval engagements in American
history. The first battle between two
ironclad warships. On March 9th, 1862,
the Monitor and the Virginia met at
dawn. Monitor was smaller, less than 2/3
the length of the Virginia and only
about a quarter of her displacement, but
the armored ships proved evenly matched.
The battle raged on for four relentless
hours. Neither ship could sink the
other, but the Monitor succeeded in her
objective. The Virginia failed to break
the blockade. The clash marked a
decisive turning point in naval warfare.
News of the battle spread across the
world and its impact was immediate. The
major naval powers halted the
construction of wooden warships. The age
of the ironclad had begun. Ironclads
marked the dawn of modern naval warfare.
And you can command the machines that
followed in War Thunder, the most
comprehensive vehicle combat game ever
made. Available for free on PC,
PlayStation, Xbox, and mobile. Command
over 2500 tanks, planes, helicopters,
and even ships from across 10 major
nations spanning nearly a century of
evolving warfare. Fight in epic PvP
battles alongside a worldwide community
of over 95 million players. What makes
War Thunder so special is the intense,
deeply realistic combat. Vehicles are
modeled in detail from engines and fuel
tanks to crew with each susceptible to
damage or disablement like in a real
battle. And when a vehicle is destroyed,
the X-ray view shows how the shot
penetrated and what systems were hit.
Combined with realistic sound and
visuals, it actually feels like
commanding a real war machine.
Personally, I love the naval combat
[music] most. Positioning armor, timing
fire, and watching shells hit with real
physics feels incredibly satisfying.
Play War Thunder and sign up for free on
PC, PlayStation, Xbox, [music] and
mobile by clicking my links in the
pinned comment and description. New
players and [music] returning players
who haven't played in the last 6 months
on PC or console will get a massive
bonus [music] pack, including an
exclusive vehicle decorator, Eagle of
Valor, 100,000 Silver Lions, [music] and
7 days of premium account. But don't
wait. This offer is only available for a
limited time. Before we dive into the
details of the USS Monitor itself, it's
important to understand the state of
naval warfare leading up to this turning
point in history. For centuries, the
world's major navies were dominated by
wooden sailpowered warships. Their
cannons were arranged in [music] fixed
broadsides. Long rows of guns lining
each side of the hull. This style had
worked for ages, but it came with
serious flaws. Wooden hulls were
vulnerable to explosive shell fire,
which could shatter exposed timber and
start fires. And broadside armament
introduced tactical limitations. The
guns could only fire across a restricted
arc on either side of the ship.
Targeting required the entire ship to
maneuver into position, and only one
side's guns could be brought to bear at
a time. Enormous firepower, but very
inefficiently [music] used. When steam
powered warships had come into play in
the mid 19th century, like the USS
Marramac, they still carried full
sailing rigs and relied on traditional
broadside gun batteries along their
sides. The CSS Virginia represented
[music] an important transition, a step
between the traditional broadside ships
and the modern turret warships that
would follow. The Virginia, [music]
which had no sails, was a case-made
ironclad with an ironplated wooden hull.
Its guns were housed inside a single
armored structure with sloped sides on
the main deck. This protected the
battery more effectively than would ever
could, but the ship still relied on the
traditional broadside firing arrangement
and inherited all of its limitations.
The USS Monitor broke that pattern
completely. For the first time, a
warship's main guns could be aimed
independently of the ship's orientation,
able to rotate nearly 360°.
Instead of lining both sides of the hall
with dozens of smaller guns, Monitor
concentrated her firepower into fewer
larger cannons that could be all trained
on a single target at once. This wasn't
just a new ship. It was an entirely new
way of thinking about naval combat.
Before we dive deeper, we actually
turned this video into something you can
own. We created a detailed USS Monitor
poster, mapping out every detail. Each
of our videos is made entirely by humans
and takes hundreds of hours of research,
modeling, and animation. And every
purchase directly supports the channel
and the team behind it. Grab yours
through the link in the description.
We're also giving one away. For a chance
to win one, [music] like this video,
subscribe, and comment below. What
surprised you most about the USS
Monitor? We'll announce the winner in
the next video. Now, let's see just what
made her so different. First, let's look
at the USS Monitor as she appeared in
July 1862 after the Battle of Hampton
Roads. She measured 54.6 m in length,
roughly the length of four city buses,
and had a beam of 12.6 m. Her most
defining feature, the gun turret, was
6.1 m in diameter. Monitor wasn't fast.
Her top speed was about 7 knots or
around 13 kmh.
She was operated by a crew of about 50
officers and enlisted men. Monitor was
powered by steam alone. She was the
first American warship without any masts
or sails. A complete break from
centuries of naval tradition. The
vessel's most striking feature was the
large cylindrical gun turret. Built from
200 mm of iron plate armor, its rounded
shape helped deflect incoming cannon
fire. [music]
It sat amid ships on the spar deck, a
flat upper deck positioned just above
the water line. And speaking of being
close to the water, Monitor's Hall sat
so low that very little of the ship was
visible above the waves, earning her the
nickname a cheesebox on a raft. All
jokes aside, this low profile
drastically reduced the target area
exposed to enemy guns. An ironplated
armor belt wrapped around the hull at
the waterline for protection, and her
flat bottomed hull gave her a very
shallow draft, making her ideal for
coastal and river operations, though
poorly suited for the rough open ocean.
With her shape and profile in mind, we
can move in closer. Starting at the bow
and working our way to the stern to see
how every external feature served a
purpose. At the bow was the ship's
anchor well. When the cover was lifted,
it revealed a recessed opening that
housed the anchor below the spar deck.
The crew raised or lowered the anchor
from inside the ship, allowing them to
remain fully protected under arour
rather than working exposed on the deck
during combat. Immediately after that
was the pilot house, a compact iron beam
reinforced structure housing the ship's
helm, which was used to steer the ship.
It was accessed from inside and the crew
could see out only through narrow slits
between the beams. Its forward placement
blocked the turrets guns from firing
directly ahead. And after the Battle of
Hampton Roads, angled armor plates were
added to help deflect incoming fire. A
canvas canopy was later fitted over the
top of the turret. The turret roof
itself was made of perforated iron plate
which vented gun smoke and allowed air
flow during combat. The canopy provided
shade, shed rain, and gave officers a
place to stand when the ship was not in
battle. Just behind the turret were the
smoke stacks venting exhaust from the
boilers below, followed by the blower
air intakes, which circulated air
throughout the vessel and into the
boilers. At the stern was a single
four-bladed screw propeller positioned
right next to the rudder that steered
the ship. The turret was capable of a
full 360° rotation, completing a full
turn in about 22 seconds. Including the
guns inside, the turret weighed about
163 metric tons. the weight of more than
four fully loaded semi-trail trucks.
Inside were two 11in dog smooth boore
shell guns, each weighing around 7,200
kg. They were muzzle loading naval guns
capable of firing 75 kg solid shot to a
range of roughly 3,300 m with a
practical rate of fire of one round
every few minutes. Each gun required a
crew of about eight men with roughly 17
men and two officers working inside the
turret during battle. The guns were
mounted on rolling carriages moving on
iron rails set into the turret floor. A
friction braking mechanism called a
compressor absorbed the gun's recoil
after firing in order to prevent it from
slamming into the rear of the turret.
This was controlled by a large brass
hand wheel which tightened or loosened
iron clamps pressing against wooden
guides beneath the carriages. The only
glimpse of the outside world came
through the gun ports. When the guns
were withdrawn for reloading or not in
use, heavy iron port stoppers swung down
to shut the openings. Azimuth, or left
to right aim, was controlled by rotating
the turret, while elevation was adjusted
using an elevator screw at the rear of
each gun. A hatch in the turret floor
allowed crew access and ammunition
transfer, but only when the turret was
rotated to align with the deck opening
below. Beneath the turret floor, the
turret's base was connected to a large
vertical shaft linked to the turret
drive mechanism located below the spar
deck. The shaft was driven through a
two-stage gear system powered by a pair
of compact steam powered donkey engines.
Passing below the spar deck led into the
ship's only interior deck located
beneath the waterline. This deck was
divided amid ships by a structural
bulkhead with crew spaces forward and
machinery spaces aft. Two large oval
iron hatchways in the bulkhead allowed
passage between the two sections. At the
bow beneath the pilot house was the
chain locker holding the anchor chain
and the capstand used to raise and lower
it. This area also served as the boat
swing store used to store tools and
materials for maintenance and contain
the ladder leading up to the pilot
house. The helm wheel inside the pilot
house controlled the rudder through a
gear and rope system. The cruise
quarters were split into two areas which
were separated by a wooden bulkhead with
a door in the center. Forward were the
officer's quarters, a compact cluster of
eight officer cabins, two rooms for the
captain, a private cabin with one of the
ship's four toilets, and a stateateroom
for conducting daily duties. The ward
room sat at the center, a shared dining
and meeting space. Each cabin had a
thick port hole set into the deck above.
After the officer spaces was the birth
deck where the enlisted men slept in
hammocks. It was crowded and offered no
privacy. This same deck held the powder
magazine [music]
starboard and the shell rooms port which
stored explosive projectiles, fuses, and
primers. Non-exlosive cannonballs were
stacked in the center of the birth deck
as well as stored inside the turret
itself. [music] Storage closets and
pantries occupied the remaining outboard
spaces along the hull. Just aft of the
midship structural bulkhead was the
ship's galley where meals were prepared.
A large iron stove stood directly
against the monitor's boilers. In the
same area where the crews and officer's
heads or the ship's toilets aft of the
galley was where the ship machinery was
located. Directly behind the galley
stood two boilers which supplied the
steam needed to power both the main
engine and the auxiliary systems
throughout the vessel. Farther a was the
main engine itself, which drove the
monitor's single propeller. Along the
port and starboard sides of this
machinery space were the coal bunkers,
partitioned off to store the fuel that
kept the ship running. Each boiler was a
double furnace horizontal fire tube
design. Coal was shoveled into the
firebox where it burned to produce the
intense heat needed to generate steam.
The hot gases then passed through rows
of horizontal tubes surrounded by water,
transferring their heat and generating
the steam that powered the ship. From
there, the exhaust gases rose through
the uptakes and out the smoke stacks,
while the steam moved through the main
steam pipe and into the engine. Monitor
used a vibrating side lever engine that
featured two horizontal cylinders
mounted back to back, each containing a
trunk piston that moved on a horizontal
plane instead of the vertical motion
seen in other steamship engines. This
configuration was chosen because its
compact, lowprofile layout allowed it to
fit below the water line. Each cylinder
had its own set of sliding valves that
regulated steam flow in and out by
moving side to side. These valves were
driven by rods linked to eccentrics,
circular discs mounted off center on the
engine crankshaft below. Each cylinder
had a steam chest where steam coming
from the boiler entered. These cylinders
used two valves. A cutff valve which
controlled how long steam was admitted
in the cylinder and a main valve which
directed steam to either side of the
piston and exhausted it. Let's take a
closer look at the operating cycle
inside one of the two cylinders. After
passing the valves, steam entered the
cylinder and pushed the piston outward.
As the piston moved, the cutff valve
gradually closed, preventing any
additional steam flow. The trapped steam
continued to expand, driving the piston
to the end of its stroke. At this point,
the main valve shifted to its exhaust
position, allowing the now lower
pressure steam to leave the cylinder and
move into the condenser. This cycle
repeated on the opposite side of the
piston for the return stroke. Each
piston was linked by a connecting rod to
a short lever arm on a rock shaft, one
that oscillates instead of rotating,
located on each side of the engine. A
second lever arm aft on the rock shaft
transmitted this motion through another
connecting rod to the crankshaft which
in turn drove the propeller shaft,
converting the rocking motion into
rotary motion. As the collection point
for the exhaust seam, the condenser was
located at the aft end of the engine on
the starboard side. A third lever arm
extending from the engine's port rock
shaft drove three pumps simultaneously
through a connecting rod attached to the
arm. the feed pump on the forward side,
the air pump in the center, and the
billagege pump on the aft side, which
was used to remove billagege water. The
condenser was a jet injection type,
meaning seawater was pumped inside and
sprayed directly into the incoming
exhaust steam, rapidly condensing it
into liquid water that collected at the
bottom of the condenser. The resulting
mixture was then pumped up to the hot
well by the air pump through a series of
unidirectional valves located on either
side of the condenser where the feed
pump returned it to the boilers as feed
water and the excess was expelled
overboard. The USS Monitor was
revolutionary, but it also had its
limitations. The low freeboard and heavy
turret made the ship unstable in rough
seas, ultimately causing the monitor to
sink during a storm on December 31st,
1862, less than a year after her launch.
Her wreck remained lost until it [music]
was discovered more than 100 years later
in 1973 off the outer banks of North
Carolina [music] near Cape Hatteris.
Even still, the monitor's legacy endured
long after she vanished below the waves.
Armored warships with rotating gun
turrets became the new standard. Ideas
that evolved through ironclads and
dreadnots into the massive battleships
of World War II. I want to give one
final shout out to War Thunder for
sponsoring this video. Sign up and play
for free on PC, PlayStation, [music]
Xbox, or mobile by using my links in the
pinned comment and description. New and
returning players who haven't played in
the last 6 months on PC or console will
get a massive bonus pack including an
exclusive vehicle decorator, Eagle of
Valor, 100,000 [music] Silver Lions, and
7 days of premium account. And remember,
this offer is only available for a
limited time, so don't wait. Quick shout
out to our last giveaway winner.
Congratulations. And a quick thank you
to our Patreon and YouTube members.
You'll be getting this exclusive desktop
background inspired by today's video.
Thanks for watching. Stay curious.